Welcome to the Joint Care Pathway.
This program is designed to help
you prepare for total joint surgery.
Our goal is to help you navigate
the decisions needed to maximize your
recovery and outcomes and limit problems or
complications before, during, and after your surgery.
Prior to your surgery,
you and your surgeon will need to make
decisions regarding your postoperative recovery.
Many patients will benefit from a visit
with a physical therapist to help
prepare for and set expectations following surgery.
Maximizing your preoperative motion and conditioning
will pay dividends after your surgery is complete
and you strive to meet your rehabilitation goals.
You and your surgeon should also discuss
plans for postoperative blood clot prevention,
discharge plans,
other medical needs or visits,
physical therapy plans
and who to call if you are having problems.
Following surgery, you will need to make plans
on where to go when you leave the hospital.
Most patients will be able to
return home following discharge.
The majority of patients benefit
from being at home
and leaving the house for therapy visits.
This will require some help at home
from family or friends,
and often requires some preoperative planning
to make sure you have the help
needed when you arrive home.
Most surgeons prefer their patients
be at home after the hospital stay is complete.
Patients who return home tend to recover more
predictably with fewer problems.
If you plan on returning home following your hospital stay,
arrange for your physical therapy visits
following discharge from the hospital.
If you plan to return home following surgery,
but are unable to arrange for transportation
for your physical therapy visits,
you may benefit from home health care visits and therapy.
Although we prefer outpatient therapy,
home therapy visits may benefit
those unable to leave the house
until they are able to secure transportation
to and from outpatient physical therapy.
Some joint replacement patients are not safe
to return home after their hospital stay.
The most common reason is that they lack
the ability to safely navigate
their home environment without risk of falling.
For these patients and others who have
significant health issues or other medical concerns,
a short stay at a skilled
nursing facility may be required.
Most patients who are discharged
to a skilled nursing facility
benefit if they return home
with outpatient physical therapy
as soon as they are capable of returning home safely.
For most, a stay at the skilled nursing facility
can be limited to 7 to 10 days following discharge.
The goal of this stay
is to make you functionally independent.
When you reach the point that you
can get in and out of bed on your own
and use a walker to safely
navigate your home environment,
you will benefit from returning home.
It takes several months to
completely recover from surgery
and the remainder of the recovery
is best completed at home.
Once you are home,
it is best to start outpatient
physical therapy as soon as possible.
Most patients following total joint surgery
will develop a plan with their surgeon
for minimizing the chance for postoperative blood clots.
The most common treatments are aspirin,
Coumadin or warfarin,
or injectable blood thinners
such as Lovenox.
Patients who are on blood thinners before surgery
may be asked to stop these medications
several days prior to surgery.
You should discuss home medications
and management of blood thinners and
blood clot prevention with your surgeon
or case management specialist.
Following surgery you may have questions
or problems that develop.
If you have what you consider to be an emergency
or life-threatening condition,
please call 911
or go to the emergency room for evaluation.
For most concerns that are not life threatening,
we prefer you contact your treating physician
or case management specialist.
If your surgeon's staff is unavailable,
please attempt to contact your
case management specialist
or the on-call physician for the office.
In general, these questions or concerns
can be best managed effectively
through a phone call or office visit.
Visiting an emergency department or
urgent care facility for nonemergent problems
is rarely useful as these facilities
are not familiar with your case.
Prior to surgery
please be aware who you should call
for concerns if they arise
after your joint replacement.
If you have other medical concerns or needs,
we ask that you manage these
prior to your surgery.
Non orthopaedic procedures
or medical treatment of any kind
should be addressed prior to your
joint replacement if possible.
In general, it is advised that
other medical procedures be delayed
for approximately 3 months
following your joint replacement,
as they may interfere with
or complicate your joint replacement recovery.
We would recommend that you continue
with your regular scheduled doctor appointments
with your primary care provider,
heart specialist,
respiratory specialist
or other physicians involved in the important
aspects of your health maintenance.
In the event that you do have an
elective procedure or surgery
scheduled within 3 months of your surgery,
please discuss this with us
and we will help counsel you on the
best time to consider these procedures.
Following surgery, you may experience
a number of issues common to
total joint patients.
It is important to know that it
is not uncommon for your incision
to be slightly red.
Low-grade fevers are common
in the first week following surgery
and rarely indicate a problem.
Infections are rare following total joint surgery
and usually present after 7 days following surgery.
Most infections will present
with a dramatic increase in pain,
swelling, and fevers.
If you experience these symptoms
call your surgeon's office or case management specialist.
Most surgeons prefer that their
total joint patients not be placed
on antibiotics without being thoroughly evaluated
by the treating physician or his staff.
If you receive a urinary catheter,
following surgery you may have a
higher chance of a urinary tract infection.
If you have burning and a need to urinate frequently,
contact your surgeon, their staff
or your case management specialist.
If you experience significant calf pain and swelling,
shortness of breath,
or chest pain following surgery,
contact your surgeon.
If these symptoms seem life-threatening
please call 911
or go to the nearest emergency room.
We are excited about the opportunity
to help you with your osteoarthritic joint.
Joint replacements can greatly enhance your life
and improve your activity level
while limiting your pain
during activities of daily living.
It is important that your recovery
and rehabilitation be your focus
for the next several months.
We will do everything we can
to help you through this process
and please do not hesitate to contact us
if you have any questions
or concerns as the process proceeds.